docs/advanced/styleguide.rst, before:

===========
Style Guide
===========

In order to usefully contribute to EPFL please adhere to the following style guide for components! For your convenience:
 * **must** is used to describe absolute requirements from which deviations will not be accepted.
 * **should** is used to describe requirements from which deviations will be accepted if a reason is given.
 * **may** is used to describe optional parts that can be left out or ignored.

Folder structure
----------------

 1. The component **must** be inside a folder with its name in lowercase with _ for word separation in the
    solute/epfl/components directory. This is referred to as the lowercase component name. Example: cardinal_layout,
    context_list_layout, button
 2. The primary content of the component **must** be in a file named <lowercase component name>.py
 3. If the component has set its :attr:`~solute.epfl.core.epflcomponentbase.ComponentBase.asset_spec` to its own
    location the directory **must** contain a sub folder named static.


Dynamic Javascript
------------------
If a file named <lowercase component name>.js exists in the components directory it **must** begin like this:

.. code-block:: javascript

    epfl.init_component("{{ compo.cid }}", "<camelcase component name>"


Static Javascript
-----------------
If a file named <lowercase component name>.js exists in the components static directory it:

 1. **Must** begin with:

     .. code-block:: javascript

         epfl.<camelcase component name> = function (cid, params)

 2. **Must** contain a call to its base component from which it inherited (normally ComponentBase):

     .. code-block:: javascript

         epfl.<camelcase base component name>.call(this, cid, params);

 3. **Must** contain an inheritance denominator:

     .. code-block:: javascript

         epfl.<camelcase component name>.inherits_from(epfl.<camelcase base component name>);

 4. **May** contain functions overwriting lifecycle methods set via the prototype mechanism which **should** call the base
    components super method:

     .. code-block:: javascript

         epfl.<camelcase component name>.prototype.before_request = function() {
            epfl.<camelcase base component name>.prototype.before_request.call(this);
         };

         epfl.<camelcase component name>.prototype.before_response = function(data) {
            epfl.<camelcase base component name>.prototype.before_response.call(this, data);
         };

         epfl.<camelcase component name>.prototype.after_response = function() {
            epfl.<camelcase base component name>.prototype.after_response.call(this);
         };

 5. **May** contain additional functions set via the prototype mechanism:

     .. code-block:: javascript

         epfl.<camelcase component name>.prototype.<fn name> = function() {};

Jinja2 Templates
----------------
A component **may** contain a custom template. It **must** be named like the main python file but **must** end with
".html". A component also **may** contain a folder called "theme". This folder **may** contain any subset of the following
files: "container.html", "before.html", "inner_container.html", "row.html" or "after.html".

Any template **may** contain jinja2 if-then-else and for directives. Any such directive **should not** access more than
one attribute. Any such directive **should** export logic exceeding these bounds into their respective python base class
in an appropriately named function or property.
If directives **should** always be the topmost form achievable on the following list:

.. code-block:: python

    {{ some_object.attr }}

    {{ some_object.attr if some_object.attr else "" }}

    {% if some_object.attr %}
        some_object.attr
    {% endif %}

If forced to use the last variant the directive **must not** be squeezed into a single line.

All attributes of a component accessed in its template **must** have a defined default value in the python base class.
All other attributes accessed in a template **must** be either:
 1. always be guaranteed to be present
 2. checked with jinja2 is defined before usage in the template:

    .. code-block:: python

        {{ obj.attr if obj.attr is defined else '' }}


Python Code
-----------
Inheritance
^^^^^^^^^^^
The main python file **should** contain a single class of the camelcase component name. It **must** be inheriting from
:class:`solute.epfl.core.epflcomponentbase.ComponentBase`,
:class:`solute.epfl.core.epflcomponentbase.ComponentContainerBase` or another component inheriting from either of them.

The __init__ method
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
The component class **must** contain an __init__ method which **must** use these minimum 3 parameters in the given
order:

 1. self
 2. page
 3. cid

The method also **must** use one of the following parameters:

 1. \*\*kwargs
 2. \*\*extra_params

The method **may** contain the additional parameter \*args.

The __init__ method **must** contain a docstring with a short description of the component. The docstring **should**
contain a usage example. The docstring **must** contain a parameter description for any parameter other than the
aforementioned.

Example:

.. code-block:: python

    class ExampleComponent(solute.epfl.epflcomponentbase.ComponentBase):
        def __init__(self, page, cid, some_param=None, **extra_args):
            """This is an example component that really does nothing. Use it like this:

            ExampleComponent(
                cid='example_component',
                some_param=False,
            )

            :param some_param: This param does something, it can be set to None, True or False.
            """

The __init__ method **should** be the first method in any component.

Custom Attributes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
All custom attributes declared within that class **must** be decorated with a docstring in one of these styles:

.. code-block:: python

    class ExampleComponent(solute.epfl.epflcomponentbase.ComponentBase):
        example_attribute = None  #: This is an example attribute, which does nothing.

        #: This is another example attribute, which still does nothing.
        second_example_attribute = None

        #: This is yet another example attribute, which still does nothing.
        #: But since the text is long it is split into multiple lines.
        third_example_attribute = None

Custom attributes that are intended to be parametrized by the user on component instantiation **must** be named
arguments in the components __init__ method.

Special Attributes or Methods
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
All components **must not** set specific values to the following attributes:

 1. cid
 2. slot

These values are reserved for the EPFL core.

All components **should not** set specific values to the following attributes or methods:

 1. :attr:`solute.epfl.core.epflcomponentbase.ComponentBase.post_event_handlers`
 2. :meth:`solute.epfl.core.epflcomponentbase.ComponentContainerBase.get_data`

These values are usually reserved for the application developer.

All components derived from :class:`solute.epfl.core.epflcomponentbase.ComponentContainerBase` **should** provide the
following attributes as appropriate:

 1. :attr:`solute.epfl.core.epflcomponentbase.ComponentContainerBase.default_child_cls`
 2. :attr:`solute.epfl.core.epflcomponentbase.ComponentContainerBase.data_interface`


Lifecycle methods
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Basic Lifecycle Methods
"""""""""""""""""""""""
All components **may** provide their own implementation of any of the following methods from
:class:`solute.epfl.core.epflcomponentbase.ComponentBase`:

  1. :meth:`solute.epfl.core.epflcomponentbase.ComponentBase.init_transaction`
  2. :meth:`solute.epfl.core.epflcomponentbase.ComponentBase.setup_component`
  3. :meth:`solute.epfl.core.epflcomponentbase.ComponentBase.after_event_handling`

If provided any such implementation **should** call its respective super method at the appropriate time.

All components **may** provide their own implementation of any of the following methods from
:class:`solute.epfl.core.epflcomponentbase.ComponentContainerBase`:

 1. :meth:`solute.epfl.core.epflcomponentbase.ComponentContainerBase.init_struct`
 2. :meth:`solute.epfl.core.epflcomponentbase.ComponentContainerBase.init_transaction`

If provided any such implementation **should** call its respective super method at the appropriate time.

If provided these methods **should** be in the given order directly after the __init__ method.

Any of the aforementioned implementations **may** contain a doc string to briefly summarize the actions taken at this
time by this component.

Event Handling
""""""""""""""
All components **may** provide event handling methods. Any event handling method **must** be prefixed with
"handle\_". Any such method **should** contain a doc string in the style of the __init__ method. If provided by a
component in the inheritance chain any such implementation **should** call its respective super method at the
appropriate time. Any such method **may** raise a
:class:`~solute.epfl.core.epflcomponentbase.MissingEventHandlerException` in order to reject handling the event and
return to the EPFL event bubbling.

All components **should not** provide post event handling methods. These methods **must** be prefixed with "on\_". Any
such method **should** contain a doc string in the style of the __init__ method. If provided by a component in the
inheritance chain any such implementation **should** call its respective super method at the appropriate time. Post
event handling **should** be left to the application developer.


Testing
-------
Generic Tests
^^^^^^^^^^^^^
All components **must** pass the generic py.test suite:

.. code-block:: bash

    py.test --target=ComponentContainerBase
    ============================================================================================================ test session starts ============================================================================================================
    platform linux2 -- Python 2.7.6 -- py-1.4.29 -- pytest-2.7.2
    rootdir: /home/juw/Projects/mcp3/pyramid_epfl, inifile:
    collected 1914 items

    solute/epfl/test/test_component_api.py ......

    ========================================================================================================= 6 passed in 0.51 seconds ==========================================================================================================

Custom Tests
^^^^^^^^^^^^
All components **must** have tests for:

 1. Every custom function involved in the rendering of the Component,
 2. Custom attributes controlling HTML output,
 3. HTML output critical to the function of the component.

These mandatory tests **should** have complete path coverage.

All components **should** have tests for:

 1. HTML output central to the components behaviour as UI element but non critical to the function of the component.

All components **may** have tests for:

 1. HTML output not central to the components behaviour as UI element or non critical to the function of the component,
 2. Any other function or behaviour not directly related to the rendering of the component.

Commit message:

styleguid and __init__ method of components

docs/advanced/styleguide.rst, after:

===========
Style Guide
===========

In order to usefully contribute to EPFL please adhere to the following style guide for components! For your convenience:
 * **must** is used to describe absolute requirements from which deviations will not be accepted.
 * **should** is used to describe requirements from which deviations will be accepted if a reason is given.
 * **may** is used to describe optional parts that can be left out or ignored.

Folder structure
----------------

 1. The component **must** be inside a folder with its name in lowercase with _ for word separation in the
    solute/epfl/components directory. This is referred to as the lowercase component name. Example: cardinal_layout,
    context_list_layout, button
 2. The primary content of the component **must** be in a file named <lowercase component name>.py
 3. If the component has set its :attr:`~solute.epfl.core.epflcomponentbase.ComponentBase.asset_spec` to its own
    location the directory **must** contain a sub folder named static.


Dynamic Javascript
------------------
If a file named <lowercase component name>.js exists in the components directory it **must** begin like this:

.. code-block:: javascript

    epfl.init_component("{{ compo.cid }}", "<camelcase component name>"


Static Javascript
-----------------
If a file named <lowercase component name>.js exists in the components static directory it:

 1. **Must** begin with:

     .. code-block:: javascript

         epfl.<camelcase component name> = function (cid, params)

 2. **Must** contain a call to its base component from which it inherited (normally ComponentBase):

     .. code-block:: javascript

         epfl.<camelcase base component name>.call(this, cid, params);

 3. **Must** contain an inheritance denominator:

     .. code-block:: javascript

         epfl.<camelcase component name>.inherits_from(epfl.<camelcase base component name>);

 4. **May** contain functions overwriting lifecycle methods set via the prototype mechanism which **should** call the base
    components super method:

     .. code-block:: javascript

         epfl.<camelcase component name>.prototype.before_request = function() {
            epfl.<camelcase base component name>.prototype.before_request.call(this);
         };

         epfl.<camelcase component name>.prototype.before_response = function(data) {
            epfl.<camelcase base component name>.prototype.before_response.call(this, data);
         };

         epfl.<camelcase component name>.prototype.after_response = function() {
            epfl.<camelcase base component name>.prototype.after_response.call(this);
         };

 5. **May** contain additional functions set via the prototype mechanism:

     .. code-block:: javascript

         epfl.<camelcase component name>.prototype.<fn name> = function() {};

Jinja2 Templates
----------------
A component **may** contain a custom template. It **must** be named like the main python file but **must** end with
".html". A component also **may** contain a folder called "theme". This folder **may** contain any subset of the following
files: "container.html", "before.html", "inner_container.html", "row.html" or "after.html".

Any template **may** contain jinja2 if-then-else and for directives. Any such directive **should not** access more than
one attribute. Any such directive **should** export logic exceeding these bounds into their respective python base class
in an appropriately named function or property.
If directives **should** always be the topmost form achievable on the following list:

.. code-block:: python

    {{ some_object.attr }}

    {{ some_object.attr if some_object.attr else "" }}

    {% if some_object.attr %}
        some_object.attr
    {% endif %}

If forced to use the last variant the directive **must not** be squeezed into a single line.

All attributes of a component accessed in its template **must** have a defined default value in the python base class.
All other attributes accessed in a template **must** be either:
 1. always be guaranteed to be present
 2. checked with jinja2 is defined before usage in the template:

    .. code-block:: python

        {{ obj.attr if obj.attr is defined else '' }}


Python Code
-----------
Inheritance
^^^^^^^^^^^
The main python file **should** contain a single class of the camelcase component name. It **must** be inheriting from
:class:`solute.epfl.core.epflcomponentbase.ComponentBase`,
:class:`solute.epfl.core.epflcomponentbase.ComponentContainerBase` or another component inheriting from either of them.

The __init__ method
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
The component class **must** contain an __init__ method which **must** use these minimum 3 parameters in the given
order:

 1. self
 2. page
 3. cid

The method also **must** use one of the following parameters:

 1. \*\*kwargs
 2. \*\*extra_params

The method **may** contain the additional parameter \*args.

The __init__ method **must** contain a docstring with a short description of the component. The docstring **should**
contain a usage example. The docstring **must** contain a parameter description for any parameter other than the
aforementioned. Also, the __init__ method does not need to call super() or set attributes directly, so it **should**
just pass.


Example:

.. code-block:: python

    class ExampleComponent(solute.epfl.epflcomponentbase.ComponentBase):

        def __init__(self, page, cid, some_param=None, **extra_args):
            """This is an example component that really does nothing. Use it like this:

            ExampleComponent(
                cid='example_component',
                some_param=False,
            )

            :param some_param: This param does something, it can be set to None, True or False.
            """
            pass


The __init__ method **should** be the first method in any component.

Custom Attributes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
All custom attributes declared within that class **must** be decorated with a docstring in one of these styles:

.. code-block:: python

    class ExampleComponent(solute.epfl.epflcomponentbase.ComponentBase):
        example_attribute = None  #: This is an example attribute, which does nothing.

        #: This is another example attribute, which still does nothing.
        second_example_attribute = None

        #: This is yet another example attribute, which still does nothing.
        #: But since the text is long it is split into multiple lines.
        third_example_attribute = None

Custom attributes that are intended to be parametrized by the user on component instantiation **must** be named
arguments in the components __init__ method.

Special Attributes or Methods
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
All components **must not** set specific values to the following attributes:

 1. cid
 2. slot

These values are reserved for the EPFL core.

All components **should not** set specific values to the following attributes or methods:

 1. :attr:`solute.epfl.core.epflcomponentbase.ComponentBase.post_event_handlers`
 2. :meth:`solute.epfl.core.epflcomponentbase.ComponentContainerBase.get_data`

These values are usually reserved for the application developer.

All components derived from :class:`solute.epfl.core.epflcomponentbase.ComponentContainerBase` **should** provide the
following attributes as appropriate:

 1. :attr:`solute.epfl.core.epflcomponentbase.ComponentContainerBase.default_child_cls`
 2. :attr:`solute.epfl.core.epflcomponentbase.ComponentContainerBase.data_interface`


Lifecycle methods
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Basic Lifecycle Methods
"""""""""""""""""""""""
All components **may** provide their own implementation of any of the following methods from
:class:`solute.epfl.core.epflcomponentbase.ComponentBase`:

  1. :meth:`solute.epfl.core.epflcomponentbase.ComponentBase.init_transaction`
  2. :meth:`solute.epfl.core.epflcomponentbase.ComponentBase.setup_component`
  3. :meth:`solute.epfl.core.epflcomponentbase.ComponentBase.after_event_handling`

If provided any such implementation **should** call its respective super method at the appropriate time.

All components **may** provide their own implementation of any of the following methods from
:class:`solute.epfl.core.epflcomponentbase.ComponentContainerBase`:

 1. :meth:`solute.epfl.core.epflcomponentbase.ComponentContainerBase.init_struct`
 2. :meth:`solute.epfl.core.epflcomponentbase.ComponentContainerBase.init_transaction`

If provided any such implementation **should** call its respective super method at the appropriate time.

If provided these methods **should** be in the given order directly after the __init__ method.

Any of the aforementioned implementations **may** contain a doc string to briefly summarize the actions taken at this
time by this component.

Event Handling
""""""""""""""
All components **may** provide event handling methods. Any event handling method **must** be prefixed with
"handle\_". Any such method **should** contain a doc string in the style of the __init__ method. If provided by a
component in the inheritance chain any such implementation **should** call its respective super method at the
appropriate time. Any such method **may** raise a
:class:`~solute.epfl.core.epflcomponentbase.MissingEventHandlerException` in order to reject handling the event and
return to the EPFL event bubbling.

All components **should not** provide post event handling methods. These methods **must** be prefixed with "on\_". Any
such method **should** contain a doc string in the style of the __init__ method. If provided by a component in the
inheritance chain any such implementation **should** call its respective super method at the appropriate time. Post
event handling **should** be left to the application developer.


Testing
-------
Generic Tests
^^^^^^^^^^^^^
All components **must** pass the generic py.test suite:

.. code-block:: bash

    py.test --target=ComponentContainerBase
    ============================================================================================================ test session starts ============================================================================================================
    platform linux2 -- Python 2.7.6 -- py-1.4.29 -- pytest-2.7.2
    rootdir: /home/juw/Projects/mcp3/pyramid_epfl, inifile:
    collected 1914 items

    solute/epfl/test/test_component_api.py ......

    ========================================================================================================= 6 passed in 0.51 seconds ==========================================================================================================

Custom Tests
^^^^^^^^^^^^
All components **must** have tests for:

 1. Every custom function involved in the rendering of the Component,
 2. Custom attributes controlling HTML output,
 3. HTML output critical to the function of the component.

These mandatory tests **should** have complete path coverage.

All components **should** have tests for:

 1. HTML output central to the components behaviour as UI element but non critical to the function of the component.

All components **may** have tests for:

 1. HTML output not central to the components behaviour as UI element or non critical to the function of the component,
 2. Any other function or behaviour not directly related to the rendering of the component.
